docs/software-engineering/dev-environment/index.md, before:

---
title: Cloud-based Development Environment
slug: cloud-based-development-environment
tags: [cloud-based, development, environment, collaboration, coding, development, environment, setup]
keywords: [coding, development, environment, setup]
last_update:
  date: 7/19/2025
  author: Piky
---
A cloud-based development environment (aka. CDE) allows developers to write, test, and deploy code using cloud resources.
This setup eliminates the need for local installations and configurations, enabling developers to work from anywhere with an internet connection.

## GitHub Codespaces
[GitHub Codespaces](https://github.com/features/codespaces) is a cloud-based development environment provided by GitHub.
It allows developers to create and manage development environments directly from their GitHub repositories.
Codespaces come pre-configured with the necessary tools and dependencies, enabling developers to start coding without any setup.    

## Firebase Studio
[Firebase Studio](https://firebase.google.com/products/studio) is a cloud-based development environment
that integrates with Firebase services.
It provides a web-based IDE for building and deploying applications using Firebase's backend services.  

## GitPod
[GitPod](https://www.gitpod.io/) is a cloud-based development environment that integrates with Git repositories.
It provides a full-featured IDE in the cloud, allowing developers to start coding immediately without local setup.
GitPod supports various programming languages and frameworks, making it versatile for different projects.  
 
## AWS Cloud9
[AWS Cloud9](https://aws.amazon.com/cloud9/) is a cloud-based integrated development environment (IDE) provided by Amazon Web Services.
It allows developers to write, run, and debug code using a web browser.
Cloud9 supports multiple programming languages and integrates with AWS services, making it suitable for building cloud-based applications.
It also provides features like real-time collaboration, terminal access, and debugging tools.   

## Replit
[Replit](https://replit.com/) is an online coding platform that provides a cloud-based development environment.
It supports multiple programming languages and allows developers to write, run, and share code directly from the browser.
Replit is particularly useful for quick prototyping and collaborative coding sessions.  

## Coder
[Coder](https://coder.com/) is a cloud-based development environment that provides a full-featured IDE in the browser.
It allows developers to create and manage development environments for various programming languages and frameworks.
Coder focuses on providing a seamless coding experience with features like real-time collaboration, terminal access, and integration with version control systems.

Commit message:

Improve note about AI generate content

docs/software-engineering/dev-environment/index.md, after:

---
title: Cloud-based Development Environment
slug: cloud-based-development-environment
tags: [cloud-based, development, environment, collaboration, coding, development, environment, setup]
keywords: [coding, development, environment, setup]
last_update:
  date: 7/19/2025
  author: Piky
---
:::warning
Please note: This content was created by AI and might contain inaccuracies.
:::
A cloud-based development environment (aka. CDE) allows developers to write, test, and deploy code using cloud resources.
This setup eliminates the need for local installations and configurations, enabling developers to work from anywhere with an internet connection.

## GitHub Codespaces
[GitHub Codespaces](https://github.com/features/codespaces) is a cloud-based development environment provided by GitHub.
It allows developers to create and manage development environments directly from their GitHub repositories.
Codespaces come pre-configured with the necessary tools and dependencies, enabling developers to start coding without any setup.    

## Firebase Studio
[Firebase Studio](https://firebase.google.com/products/studio) is a cloud-based development environment
that integrates with Firebase services.
It provides a web-based IDE for building and deploying applications using Firebase's backend services.  

## GitPod
[GitPod](https://www.gitpod.io/) is a cloud-based development environment that integrates with Git repositories.
It provides a full-featured IDE in the cloud, allowing developers to start coding immediately without local setup.
GitPod supports various programming languages and frameworks, making it versatile for different projects.  
 
## AWS Cloud9
[AWS Cloud9](https://aws.amazon.com/cloud9/) is a cloud-based integrated development environment (IDE) provided by Amazon Web Services.
It allows developers to write, run, and debug code using a web browser.
Cloud9 supports multiple programming languages and integrates with AWS services, making it suitable for building cloud-based applications.
It also provides features like real-time collaboration, terminal access, and debugging tools.   

## Replit
[Replit](https://replit.com/) is an online coding platform that provides a cloud-based development environment.
It supports multiple programming languages and allows developers to write, run, and share code directly from the browser.
Replit is particularly useful for quick prototyping and collaborative coding sessions.  

## Coder
[Coder](https://coder.com/) is a cloud-based development environment that provides a full-featured IDE in the browser.
It allows developers to create and manage development environments for various programming languages and frameworks.
Coder focuses on providing a seamless coding experience with features like real-time collaboration, terminal access, and integration with version control systems.
